---
layout: default
title: BeerDEcoded
image: /images/beerdecoded.jpg
description: Sequencing the DNA of beer
---

## Why?

Beer is alive! It contains DNA that comes from its ingredients (hops, malts,
yeast) and some hundred microbes. There are 1,000+ yeasts used for brewing and
200+ hop varieties, each one bearing a different DNA and contributing to
differentiate its properties.

We can use the beer to sensibilize the public to molecular biology and genomic
related research, DNA sequencing and data analysis and the challenges and
possibilities that genomics brings to our society.

To bring the public to the contact of molecular biology, data-analysis, and open
science, we organize workshops in which pupils, students and citizens extract,
sequence and analyze the "DNA of beer".

## How?

This project was started by
[Hackarium](http://www.hackuarium.ch/en/beerdecoded/), an open Laboratory for
DIY Biology, in Lausanne.

In Freiburg, we develop a first prototype of the DNA extraction and sequencing
protocols using the [Nanopore MinION](https://nanoporetech.com/products/minion),
a portable real-time device for DNA sequencing. The results are very promising
and the initial feedback is overwhelming. We have successfully identified
specific brewing yeast strains from the DNA extracted out of bottled beer. For
the data analysis, we create a workflow using Galaxy. This open source,
web-based platform makes reproducible computational biology and bioinformatics
accessible to anyone with web-access.

To support the workshop, training material (slides, hands-on material,
interactive web-tours) are creating to guide our participants from data upload
to data analysis.

The protocols used for the DNA extraction and sequencing, the workflows, the
sequencing data, and the training materials are developed in an open
collaborative environment, adhering to the open science principles and shared
online. We are aiming at providing a template project for other communities
around the globe to pursue similar efforts locally.

## Some pictures

{% include projects/beerdecoded.html %}
